enhancements/kubernetes-nmstate-integration.md, before:

---
title: kubernetes-nmstate
authors:
  - "@schseba"
reviewers:

approvers:
  - TBD
  
creation-date: 2019-12-18
last-updated: 2019-12-18
status: 
---

# kubernetes-nmstate

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

A proposal to deploy [kubernetes-nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/) on OpenShift.

Node-networking configuration driven by Kubernetes and executed by
[nmstate](https://nmstate.github.io/).

## Motivation

With hybrid clouds, node-networking setup is becoming even more challenging.
Different payloads have different networking requirements, and not everything
can be satisfied as overlays on top of the main interface of the node (e.g.
SR-IOV, L2, other L2).
The [Container Network Interface](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni)
(CNI) standard enables different
solutions for connecting networks on the node with pods. Some of them are
[part of the standard](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins), and there are
others that extend support for [Open vSwitch bridges](https://github.com/kubevirt/ovs-cni),
[SR-IOV](https://github.com/hustcat/sriov-cni), and more...

However, in all of these cases, the node must have the networks setup before the
pod is scheduled. Setting up the networks in a dynamic and heterogenous cluster,
with dynamic networking requirements, is a challenge by itself - and this is
what this project is addressing.

### Goals

- Deploy kubernetes-nmstate as part of openshift

### Non-Goals

- Replace SRIOV operator

## Proposal

A new kubernetes-nmstate operator Deployment is deployed to the cluster as part of the the OpenShift
installation, via CVO.

The operator has a single CRD, called `NMstate`. When a custom resource of kind `NMstate`, with 
a name of 'nmstate' is created, it will then create the CRDs for the kubernetes-nmstate handler.
Then, the namespace, RBAC, and finally the DaemonSet are applied. Custom resources of kind `NMstate`
with other names will be ignored.

A new kubernetes-nmstate handler DaemonSet is deployed in the cluster by the operator.
This DaemonSet contains nmstate package and interacts with the NetworkManager
on the host by mounting the related dbus. The project contains three
Custom Resource Definitions, `NodeNetworkState`, `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` and
`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment`. `NodeNetworkState` objects are created per each
node in the cluster and can be used to report available interfaces and network configuration.
These objects are created by kubernetes-nmstate and must not be touched by a user.
`NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` objects can be used to specify desired
networking state per node or set of nodes. It uses API similar to `NodeNetworkState`. 
`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment` objects will be created per each node, per each matching
`NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy`.

kubernetes-nmstate DaemonSet creates a custom resource of `NodeNetworkState` type per each node and
updates the network topology from each OpenShift node.

User configures host network changes and apply a policy in `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` custom
resource. Network topology is configured via `desiredState` section in `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy`.
Multiple `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` custom resources can be created.

Upon receiving a notification event of `NodeNetworkState` update,
kubernetes-nmstate Daemon verify the correctness of `NodeNetworkState` custom resource and
apply the selected profile to the specific node.

`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment` objects is a read-only object that represents Policy exectuion
per each matching Node. It will expose configuration status per each Node.

A new container image (kubernetes-nmstate-handler) will be created.

A new container image (kubernetes-nmstate-operator) will be created. However, the operator
and the handler will co-exist in the same upstream repo.

An upstream API group of nmstate.io is currently used.

### User Stories

#### Bond creation

* Be able to create bond interfaces on OpenShift nodes.
 
  Typically, MCO + Ignition would be utilized. However, in a Day 1 install, that may not be possible.
  It may be necessary for the bond/vlan configuration be done before Ignition can even be reached.
  
* Create a vlan interface on top of the bond inter.

#### Assign ip address

* Assign static and/or dynamic ip address on interfaces
* Assign ipv4 and/or ipv6

#### Create/Update/Remove network routes

* Be able to Create/Update/Remove network routes for different interfaces like (bond,ethernet,sriov vf and sriov pf)

#### Manage/Configure host SR-IOV network device

* Be able to change host Virtual functions configuration (not managed by the sriov-operator) like vlans mtu driver etc..

#### Rollback

* Be able to rollback network configuration 
if we lose connectivity to the openshift api server after applying a policy.

### Implementation Details

The proposal introduces kubernetes-nmstate as Tech Preview.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

- Functional tests will be implemented

### Graduation Criteria

Initial support for kubernetes-nmstate will be Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview

- kubernetes-nmstate can be installed via container image
- Host network topology can be configured via CRDs

#### Tech Preview -> GA

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

kubernetes-nmstate runs as a DaemonSet.

## Implementation History

### Version 4.6

Tech Preview

## Infrastructure Needed

This requires a github repo be created under openshift org to hold a clone from kubernetes-nmstate

Commit message:

Add information about filtering nodes
Also mark as implementable

enhancements/kubernetes-nmstate-integration.md, after:

---
title: kubernetes-nmstate
authors:
  - "@schseba"
  - "@bcrochet"
reviewers:

approvers:
  - TBD
  
creation-date: 2019-12-18
last-updated: 2019-12-18
status: 
---

# kubernetes-nmstate

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

A proposal to deploy [kubernetes-nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/) on OpenShift.

Node-networking configuration driven by Kubernetes and executed by
[nmstate](https://nmstate.github.io/).

## Motivation

With hybrid clouds, node-networking setup is becoming even more challenging.
Different payloads have different networking requirements, and not everything
can be satisfied as overlays on top of the main interface of the node (e.g.
SR-IOV, L2, other L2).
The [Container Network Interface](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni)
(CNI) standard enables different
solutions for connecting networks on the node with pods. Some of them are
[part of the standard](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins), and there are
others that extend support for [Open vSwitch bridges](https://github.com/kubevirt/ovs-cni),
[SR-IOV](https://github.com/hustcat/sriov-cni), and more...

However, in all of these cases, the node must have the networks setup before the
pod is scheduled. Setting up the networks in a dynamic and heterogenous cluster,
with dynamic networking requirements, is a challenge by itself - and this is
what this project is addressing.

### Goals

- Deploy kubernetes-nmstate as part of openshift

### Non-Goals

- Replace SRIOV operator

## Proposal

A new kubernetes-nmstate operator Deployment is deployed to the cluster as part of the the OpenShift
installation, via CVO.

The operator has a single CRD, called `NMstate`. When a custom resource of kind `NMstate`, with 
a name of 'nmstate' is created, it will then create the CRDs for the kubernetes-nmstate handler.
Then, the namespace, RBAC, and finally the DaemonSet are applied. Custom resources of kind `NMstate`
with other names will be ignored. 

The `NMState` CR accepts a node filter, allowing one to add a label to nodes to indicate where the
DaemonSet will be deployed.

A new kubernetes-nmstate handler DaemonSet is deployed in the cluster by the operator.
This DaemonSet contains nmstate package and interacts with the NetworkManager
on the host by mounting the related dbus. The project contains three
Custom Resource Definitions, `NodeNetworkState`, `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` and
`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment`. `NodeNetworkState` objects are created per each
node in the cluster and can be used to report available interfaces and network configuration.
These objects are created by kubernetes-nmstate and must not be touched by a user.
`NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` objects can be used to specify desired
networking state per node or set of nodes. It uses API similar to `NodeNetworkState`. 
`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment` objects will be created per each node, per each matching
`NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy`.

kubernetes-nmstate DaemonSet creates a custom resource of `NodeNetworkState` type per each node and
updates the network topology from each OpenShift node.

User configures host network changes and apply a policy in `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` custom
resource. Network topology is configured via `desiredState` section in `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy`.
Multiple `NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy` custom resources can be created.

Upon receiving a notification event of `NodeNetworkState` update,
kubernetes-nmstate Daemon verify the correctness of `NodeNetworkState` custom resource and
apply the selected profile to the specific node.

`NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment` objects is a read-only object that represents Policy exectuion
per each matching Node. It will expose configuration status per each Node.

A new container image (kubernetes-nmstate-handler) will be created.

A new container image (kubernetes-nmstate-operator) will be created. However, the operator
and the handler will co-exist in the same upstream repo.

An upstream API group of nmstate.io is currently used.

### User Stories

#### Bond creation

* Be able to create bond interfaces on OpenShift nodes.
 
  Typically, MCO + Ignition would be utilized. However, in a Day 1 install, that may not be possible.
  It may be necessary for the bond/vlan configuration be done before Ignition can even be reached.
  
* Create a vlan interface on top of the bond inter.

#### Assign ip address

* Assign static and/or dynamic ip address on interfaces
* Assign ipv4 and/or ipv6

#### Create/Update/Remove network routes

* Be able to Create/Update/Remove network routes for different interfaces like (bond,ethernet,sriov vf and sriov pf)

#### Manage/Configure host SR-IOV network device

* Be able to change host Virtual functions configuration (not managed by the sriov-operator) like vlans mtu driver etc..

#### Rollback

* Be able to rollback network configuration 
if we lose connectivity to the openshift api server after applying a policy.

### Implementation Details

The proposal introduces kubernetes-nmstate as Tech Preview.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

- Functional tests will be implemented

### Graduation Criteria

Initial support for kubernetes-nmstate will be Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview

- kubernetes-nmstate can be installed via container image
- Host network topology can be configured via CRDs

#### Tech Preview -> GA

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

kubernetes-nmstate runs as a DaemonSet.

## Implementation History

### Version 4.6

Tech Preview

## Infrastructure Needed

This requires a github repo be created under openshift org to hold a clone from kubernetes-nmstate
